---
title: Let's *actually use* computers when reading
tags: [digital-publishing]
draft: true
projects: [next-book]
---
That paper/display discussion is nonsense. Computers in any form are not just books that do not smell good. Digital isn't just a display technology. Please help.

A lot has changed since [that vague, but exciting paper](https://info.cern.ch/Proposal.html) has been published. The web of terse documents has become the web of platforms and apps. Black text and blue links turned into complex UI servicing any need. Flexbox, service workers, front-end JS frameworks, bots, hamburger menus, this is what's new.

The document did not change much. Some paragraphs and headings, media and links. Nobody really cares for the HTML5 semantics (other than SEO stuff). Few people use [schemas](https://schema.org). There's not a lot of change when it comes to digital content — standards, user interface conventions, mental models. Most UI tries to obscure print/digital divide. The only big trend when it comes to content is walling it inside closed apps and platforms.

## Reading like it's 1989

Web documents are articles and books with clickable/tapable parts. There's not even any reasonable interaction to view *title* attributes on touch devices. In professional use it's normal to distribute digital content as PDF. Fake paper is still better than HTML for scholars, corporations, governments, NGOs and many others. Many news media restrict linking to keep readers from running to other sites.

It's still March 1989 when it comes to reading.

Is HTML a failure? It's not. It's just a thing — as is flour, butter, democracy, media or gasoline. A thing does not bring the solution, it's to be used to achieve something — such as good life, strawberries mid-winter or cupcakes. Or maybe a better understanding of the world.

## How do we read

Reading is communication. Winks, tweets, news articles, papers and books are similar affairs. There are limits to their love.

Some are given by their nature — winks are ambiguous, tweets are short, papers are situated in discussion and books are just too long. Other limits come from the tools being used: tweets get lost in the ever changing timeline, news sites are mess of outdated articles and ads, academic papers are published slowly due to the publication process and paper books are hard to annotate as these margins are quite narrow.

Newer tools overcome some limits and enable new kinds of interactions. Web documents are already used in different way than the texts in books and magazines: digital copies, links, long distance access, fulltext search, rich content, sharing, scraping, automatic alerts, all this is cool.

But when it comes to the *unit* — a document — its creation, structure and possible use are pretty old-fashioned. Skim it, read it, read other stuff maybe.

I focus on longer non-fiction texts to narrow my focus — it helps to keep this short, but I believe that most points can be applied more widely. Even outside written content.

## Where to go?

This is not a strategic document in any way. This is just just me, kicking a ball, hoping someone else notices it and plays along. I don't even know what kind of ball game this is. What follows is several observations that are important for me — and might be for someone else.

Printed media contain structured text, images and links (sources).

Reading the text means to skim, to read, to look at pictures, to follow links, to make annotations, to return to other parts to revisit arguments, to skip expectedly unnecessary parts (varies by reader).

### Text structure

1. Annotating text is hard, in print and in digital too.
	- When working with code there are comments. In HTML there are comments too, but they are shown only when editing the code. They're not useful to comment the content, just the structure of markup as it's not possible to comment on a range of words, just to place a comment into some position.)
	- A standardized way to work with annotations in HTML is desirable:
		- There are attempts — [Evernote Clipper](https://evernote.com/webclipper/) downloads documents and works with them offline. Genius has its [Web Annotator](https://genius.com/web-annotator), that [undermines web security](https://www.theverge.com/2016/5/25/11505454/news-genius-annotate-the-web-content-security-policy-vulnerability).
		- Annotations need to work above the markup, as they would not nest nicely with other elements. Overlapping annotations are common, too.

1. Annotating in print cannot change the text much: emphasizing and commenting some parts in margins is all that's possible. (Tearing the book apart and using scissors is mostly extreme case, as it destroys possibility of re-reading. Xeroxing the material enables this behavior, but it's labourious and generally not practiced.)
	- **Digital removes obstacles — it's possible to do anything with the text, if it's provided in open format.** This is frequently not the case: either the format is closed via DRM, or it is provided as fake paper PDF, scanned PDF (even without OCR or with bad OCR) and even when it's open, it might be badly structured (generated by WYSIWYG software with visual hacks or without semantic tags) or otherwise mangled.
	- Plain text is not enough — semantic markup is needed as article or book is not a tweet. (And even tweets may have richer structure than linear sentence.)
	- With open format text, it's possible to do anything, but it's not easy at all. Working with large body of text is not common and it's hard to imagine for most readers — that's unsurprising as there's a broad gap between “writing” and “reading” software. (And hardware too: tablets are generally for reading while “computers” are for serious writing.) Jumping between “reader of static text” and “text manipulator” feels bad, but it's the easiest way now. Removing this distinction might be one the most important steps toward using the digital text well.
		- Aside: For me, it's common to work with spreadsheets and perform some tasks in plaintext editor, as it's easier to do (thanks to explicitness). I believe this is very similar case.
	- When I talk about *“anything”*, what is it?
		- Cutting the text and viewing different parts of the document at once. Comparing arguments, checking definitions, reviewing details.
		- Working with the structure - cutting paragraphs apart, indenting them to explore their internal structure, coloring the differences, rephrasing the original inside the book, reducing arguments and visually opening and collapsing them (these may come predefined).
			- It's possible to „look up“ a word in the Apple operation systems — imagine that functionality with contextual integration (do not look up in Wikipedia, just check for the early uses in the used material).
			- Similarly it would be possible to „collapse“ some argument inside or mark it with color.
			- This borders on symbolic notations (as in maths) and visualizations — rightly so, as a well structured text can be easily turned into visualization (that can be generated on the fly, predefined or easily drafted with the help of the reading software). Imagine reading interactive equations in maths and collapsing Foucault's narrative into visual symbols.
			- See these [two](https://twitter.com/Bopuc/status/547364200235167744) [threads](https://twitter.com/Bopuc/status/704591225274372096) by [@Bopuc](https://twitter.com/Bopuc).
		- Checking source material inside reader and comparing the use of facts.
		- Working with the illustrations — ideally zooming into pictures, splitviewing their details, recutting video, changing parameters of charts, exploring data behind them.

1. When reading non-fiction, it might be important to check the sources — the more a paper is involved in a current discussion, the more it's actually interesting, and the more it's needed to see how authors work with their sources — with 3rd parties and their own data.
	- Conventionally in print, there are several ways of including information about 3rd party sources: citations with links (numbered, bracketed or in footnotes/endnotes). It's not possible to put this information elsewhere (as not to be in a way of focused reading) and it's also hard to mark out the sourced information (quote might seem easy, paraphrase and using source facts is harder).
	- I would love to be constantly sure when I read referenced information and when authors refer to their own data or experience. This could be shown by color of the text — with an interaction that links to reference (to the exact location) or to data or their visualisation.
	- Coloring may be universal (white for their own findings, blue for referenced sources) or ad hoc (multiple colors when citing multiple sources in a section of the text).
	- It is important to be sure what I'm reading, but it might be even good to get the citation markings out of the way (either in case when color reminds me of the source or in case when I just want to focus on the text). Print cannot do this, in digital this might be a simple transformation.
	- Page numbers are still the most important way of addressing the exact location in a source.
		- This is non-transferrable between translations, editions and formats without problems (I have a translation of Saussure's Course in General Linguistics that has page breaks from the French edition). There's a great example of a source that uses much better system: it's The Bible — not exactly a cutting edge source, but a well explored one.
		- Let's break this tradition and create a better solution. Paragraphs or sentences might be easily numbered and simple tools may ensure an easy transmission of this numbering even between revised editions.

















Non-fiction-end - ? / e-learning/mooc / kb / wikipedia
//Fiction-end - games / interactive stories

//- linearity / branching / variation
//- not just reading, but working with the finished document


- visualisations
- working with data


Kindle annotations (10 marked this as important)

 „content browsers“ that build on top of the browser / js plugin
A look on the web typography
interactions / metadata
  //- get source + mark sourced
  - aside/footnote
  - structure
//  	- bopuc - indentation
  //- annotate
  - explore data / jupyter
  //- work with annotations
  //- pinpoint section in readable fashion (convert to books, transfer btween editions)

--> Open standard (for what?)

- licensing
	- multiple licensing: check source, read, use reader, participate in sharing ring, use as learning resource in a corporation, reuse parts…

- skimming, speed reading





1. Reading is actually non-linear, while text is linear.



1. Digital text does not have to have same content for all readers.
	- Branching is one option — parallel structures may bring different takes on same topic. Why would any non-fiction writer use this? E.g. when writing introductory textbook that is discussed at seminars in groups, it may present every reader with a slightly different POV and enrich the ensuing discussion.
	- Variation is another option — text can change some of its properties (e.g. used examples, units of measurement, currencies) to allow for better understanding. Benefit of this is easier to see.




- Links in a book




### Embracing digital

- Fiction is full on into the digital: good digital fiction is just not called book, they call it “games”. There's even a lot of games that have virtually no gaming mechanics, they're just interactive stories (and unlike in the 90s, these are good).

- Nonfiction/news/academia is tougher — there's [data journalism](https://datajournalismhandbook.org/1.0/en/introduction_0.html) and there are several publishing [projects](https://jods.mitpress.mit.edu) and the [Open Access](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_access) movement that

















#









